[DPE-3253] Charmed Spark tutorial (#87)
canonical/spark-client-snap: docs/tutorial/t-spark-shell.md

## Interacting with Spark using Interactive Shell

Spark comes with an interactive shell that provides a simple way to learn the API. It is available in either Scala or Python. In this section, we're going to play around a bit with Spark's shell to interact directly with the Spark cluster.

### PySpark Shell

Spark comes with a built-in Python shell where we can execute commands interactively against Spark cluster using Python programming language.

PySpark shell can be launched with `spark-client` snap as:

```bash
spark-client.pyspark \
  --username spark --namespace spark
```

Once the shell is open and ready, you should see a prompt simlar to the following:

```
Welcome to
      ____              __
     / __/__  ___ _____/ /__
    _\ \/ _ \/ _ `/ __/  '_/
   /__ / .__/\_,_/_/ /_/\_\   version 3.4.1
      /_/

Using Python version 3.10.12 (main, Jun 11 2023 05:26:28)
Spark context Web UI available at http://172.31.29.134:4040
Spark context available as 'sc' (master = k8s://https://172.31.29.134:16443, app id = spark-b364a0a9a2cb41f3a713c62b900fbd82).
SparkSession available as 'spark'.
>>> 
```

> When you open the PySpark shell, Spark spawns a couple of executor pods in the background to process the commands. You can see them by fetching the list of pods in the `spark` namespace.

Reviewer: maybe it is worth mentioning that this is highlighted by the log above, where the python shell says `SpakContext available as sc` and `SparkSession...`

Author: Added.

> When you open the PySpark shell, Spark spawns a couple of executor pods in the background to process the commands. You can see them by fetching the list of pods in the `spark` namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you open the PySpark shell, Spark spawns a couple of executor pods in the background to process the commands. You can see them by fetching the list of pods in the `spark` namespace in a separate shell.
```
Unsure about my wording here, but I basically just wanted to clarify that this is not a command for the pyspark shell that they just opened up.

```bash
kubectl get pods -n spark
```

You should see output lines similar to the following:
```bash
pysparkshell-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx-exec-1              1/1     Running            0          xs
pysparkshell-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx-exec-2              1/1     Running            0          xs
```

> As you can see, PySpark spawned two executor pods within the `spark` namespace. This is the namespace that we provided as a value to `--namespace` argument when launching `pyspark`. It is in these executor pods that your commands will be executed. Since we opened the PySpark shell using `spark-client` snap installed in the host machine, the driver program is running in the host machine itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, PySpark spawned two executor pods within the `spark` namespace. This is the namespace that we provided as a value to `--namespace` argument when launching `pyspark`. It is in these executor pods that the data is cached and the computation will be executed, therefore creating an computational architecture that can horizontally scale to large datasets (BigData). On the other hand, the PySpark shell started by the `spark-client` snap will act as a `driver`, controlling and orchestrating the operations of the executors. More information about the Spark architecture can be found [here](https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/cluster-overview.html).
```

```python
lines = """Canonical's Charmed Data Platform solution for Apache Spark runs Spark jobs on your Kubernetes cluster.
You can get started right away with MicroK8s - the mightiest tiny Kubernetes distro around! 
The spark-client snap simplifies the setup to run Spark jobs against your Kubernetes cluster. 
Spark on Kubernetes is a complex environment with many moving parts.
Sometimes, small mistakes can take a lot of time to debug and figure out.
"""
```

The following is a function that returns the number of vowel characters in the string:

```python
def count_vowels(text: str) -> int:
  count = 0
  for char in text:
    if char.lower() in "aeiou":
      count += 1
  return count
```

To test this function, the string `lines` can now be passed into it and the number of vowels is printed to the console as follows:

```python
>>> count_vowels(lines)
128
```

Since Spark is a distributed processing framework, we can split up this task and parallellize it over multiple executor pods. This parallelization can be done as simply as:

```python
>>> from operator import add
>>> spark.sparkContext.parallelize(lines.splitlines(), 2).map(count_vowels).reduce(add)
128
```

> Here, we parallelize the the tax into two executors (passed as an argument to `parallelize` function), where each line is processed by an executor pod. The number of vowels in each line is then added up to calculate the total number of occurrences of vowel characters in the string. This kind of parallelization of task is particularly useful in processing very large data sets which helps in reducing the processing time significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we split the data into the two executors (passed as an argument to `parallelize` function), generating a distributed data structure, e.g. RDD[str], where each line is stored in one of the (possibly many) executors. The number of vowels in each line is then computed, line by line, with the `map` function, and then the numbers are aggregated and added up to calculate the total number of occurrences of vowel characters in the entire dataset. This kind of parallelization of task is particularly useful in processing very large data sets which helps in reducing the processing time significantly, and it is generally referred as the MapReduce pattern.
```

To exit from PySpark shell, you can simply run `exit()` or press `Ctrl` + Z key combination.

### Scala Shell
Spark comes with a built-in interactive Scala shell as well. Enter the following command to enter an interactive Scala shell:

```bash

> spark-client.spark-shell --username spark --namespace spark

Reviewer: maybe one could provide a different number of executors (like 4), just for the sake of showing how the configuration can work and build "a bit more" on top of the previsou example

Author: Added

```

Once the shell is open and ready, you should see a prompt simlar to the following:

```
Welcome to
      ____              __
     / __/__  ___ _____/ /__
    _\ \/ _ \/ _ `/ __/  '_/
   /___/ .__/\_,_/_/ /_/\_\   version 3.4.1
      /_/
         
Using Scala version 2.12.17 (OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM, Java 11.0.20.1)
Type in expressions to have them evaluated.
Type :help for more information.

scala> 
```

Just as in PySpark shell, the spark context and spark session are readily available in the shell as `sc` and `spark` respectively. Moreover, new executor pods are created in `spark` namespace in order to execute the commands, just like in the PySpark shell.

The example of counting the vowel characters can be equivalently run in Scala with the following lines:

```scala

> val lines = """Canonical's Charmed Data Platform solution for Apache Spark runs Spark jobs on your Kubernetes cluster.
> You can get started right away with MicroK8s - the mightiest tiny Kubernetes distro around! 
> The spark-client snap simplifies the setup to run Spark jobs against your Kubernetes cluster. 
> Spark on Kubernetes is a complex environment with many moving parts.
> Sometimes, small mistakes can take a lot of time to debug and figure out.
> """
> 
> def countVowels(text: String): Int = {
>   text.toLowerCase.count("aeiou".contains(_))
> }
> 
> sc.parallelize(lines.split("\n"), 2).map(countVowels).reduce(_ + _)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scala> val lines = """Canonical's Charmed Data Platform solution for Apache Spark runs Spark jobs on your Kubernetes cluster.
You can get started right away with MicroK8s - the mightiest tiny Kubernetes distro around! 
The spark-client snap simplifies the setup to run Spark jobs against your Kubernetes cluster. 
Spark on Kubernetes is a complex environment with many moving parts.
Sometimes, small mistakes can take a lot of time to debug and figure out.
"""

scala> def countVowels(text: String): Int = {
  text.toLowerCase.count("aeiou".contains(_))
}

scala> sc.parallelize(lines.split("\n"), 2).map(countVowels).reduce(_ + _)
```
For clarity and formatting consistency (no prompt for standard shell, prompt for special shells)

Author: Wouldn't this make copying the commands quite difficult though? One has to copy them one by one, and if someone copies the entire block (using the copy button on top right), the copied command would not work (since there is extra string `scala>` in the beginning.

Reviewer 2: Yes, and that's a valid point that often gets discussed during style guide debates about command prompts. 
But then we'd have to keep it consistent by not including the python shell prompt either (`>>>`), and making sure it's clear which shell we're talking about in each instruction, since there are three involved.
